# GORDON HENRY HOLMES v HOUSING NEW ZEALAND CORPORATION

## Case Details

**Decision No.:** [2015] NZHRRT 42  
**Reference No.:** HRRT 012/2013  
**Court/Tribunal:** IN THE HUMAN RIGHTS REVIEW TRIBUNAL  
**Jurisdiction:** Dunedin  
**Legal Basis:** THE PRIVACY ACT 1993  
**Decision Type:** DECISION OF TRIBUNAL ON COSTS APPLICATION BY PLAINTIFF  
**Hearing Date:** 12 and 13 November 2014  
**Decision Date:** 11 September 2015  

## Parties

### Plaintiff
- **GORDON HENRY HOLMES** (PLAINTIFF, Individual)

### Defendant
- **HOUSING NEW ZEALAND CORPORATION** (DEFENDANT, Corporation)

## Tribunal Members
- **Mr RPG Haines QC** - Chairperson
- **Ms WV Gilchrist** - Member
- **Ms ST Scott** - Member

## Appearances
- **Mr GH Holmes** for Plaintiff
- **Ms CP Paterson** for defendant

---

## DECISION OF TRIBUNAL ON COSTS APPLICATION BY PLAINTIFF

### [1]
In a decision given on 11 August 2015 (Holmes v Housing New Zealand Corporation <sup>[2015]</sup> NZHRRT 36) a declaration was made that Housing New Zealand Corporation interfered with the privacy of Mr Holmes by refusing to make personal information available to him in response to a request of 27 March 2012 for access to that information. In addition, damages of $400 were awarded for injury to feelings. Costs were reserved.

*Citation: case - Holmes v Housing New Zealand Corporation [2015] NZHRRT 36*

### [2]
In submissions dated 21 August 2015 Mr Holmes offered an “estimated figure” of $150 for the disbursements incurred by him.

### [3]
In submissions dated 7 September 2015 Ms Paterson pointed out the volume of material involved in the hearing was small and that while Mr Holmes had undoubtedly incurred expenses, the claimed figure of $150 was excessive. Housing New Zealand Corporation accept $100 would be appropriate to cover Mr Holmes' disbursements.

## DISCUSSION

### [4]
As a litigant in person Mr Holmes is not entitled to costs as such but is entitled to disbursements which can be substantiated.

### [5]
It is understandable Mr Holmes cannot produce receipts for each item copied or for his postage costs. An estimate is necessary.

### [6]
We agree with Housing New Zealand Corporation that the $150 claimed by Mr Holmes is excessive.

### [7]
In view of the fact Housing New Zealand Corporation accepts $100 is appropriate to cover Mr Holmes' disbursements, that is our award.

## ORDER

### [8]
Housing New Zealand Corporation is ordered to pay Mr Holmes costs of $100.

---

**Mr RPG Haines QC**  
Chairperson

**Ms WV Gilchrist**  
Member

**Ms ST Scott**  
Member

