# Greer v Police (Strike-Out Application) [2022] NZHRRT 51

## Case Details

**Decision No.:** [2022] NZHRRT 51  
**Reference No.:** HRRT 075/2015  
**Court/Tribunal:** IN THE HUMAN RIGHTS REVIEW TRIBUNAL  
**Jurisdiction:** AT WELLINGTON  
**Legal Basis:** THE PRIVACY ACT 2020  
**Decision Type:** DECISION OF TRIBUNAL STRIKING-OUT CLAIM  
**Hearing Date:** On the papers  
**Decision Date:** 21 December 2022  

## Parties

### Plaintiff
- **ALAN IVO GREER** (PLAINTIFF, )

### Defendant
- **COMMISSIONER OF POLICE** (DEFENDANT, )

## Tribunal Members
- **Ms SJ Eyre** - Chairperson
- **Dr SJ Hickey MZM** - Member
- **Ms L Ashworth** - Member

## Appearances
- **Mr A Greer in person** for 
- **Mr R S May and Mr S B McCusker** for for defendant

---

## DECISION OF TRIBUNAL STRIKING-OUT CLAIM

### [1]
This decision relates to a claim filed by Mr Greer in the Human Rights Review Tribunal alleging that the Commissioner of Police (Police) failed to respond to an information privacy request he made in 2014 in a timely manner and in full.

## BACKGROUND

### [2]
On 27 November 2015 Mr Greer filed a claim against the Police. The claim alleged a failure to respond to Mr Greer's information privacy request dated 29 September 2014. Police dispute there was any interference with Mr Greer's privacy and filed a statement of reply on 24 December 2015 and an amended statement of reply on 12 April 2017.

### [3]
An initial teleconference was held in 2017 and Mr Greer was granted leave to file an application seeking further particulars relating to the statement of reply. However, in response to that direction, Mr Greer filed a 19-page memorandum that was rejected by the Tribunal for containing scandalous and offensive statements.

### [4]
By Minute dated 28 January 2020, following a teleconference, the Tribunal directed Mr Greer to file his written statements of evidence by 4 pm on Friday 27 March 2020.

### [5]
This timetable was amended following the need for further directions relating to discovery, so by way of a Minute dated 10 September 2020 the Tribunal directed Mr Greer to file and serve his written statements of evidence by 18 December 2020.

### [6]
Mr Greer has not filed his evidence and has not been in contact with the Tribunal since the September 2020 teleconference.

### [7]
By Minute dated 31 October 2022, the Tribunal provided Mr Greer with a further and final opportunity to file his evidence. Mr Greer was directed to file his evidence by 2 December 2022 and was given notice that if he did not do so, the Tribunal would consider striking-out his claim under s 115A of the Human Rights Act 1993. Mr Greer did not file his evidence.

*Citation: statute - s 115A of the Human Rights Act 1993*

### [8]
On 5 December 2022 the Tribunal notified the parties that it was considering striking-out Mr Greer's claim on the papers and if either party wished to provide submissions they were to do so by 19 December 2022.

### [9]
On 19 December 2022, the Police filed a memorandum submitting that having regard to the guidance provided in Gwizo v Attorney-General <sup>[2022]</sup> NZHC 2727 (Gwizo), Mr Greer's consistent failure to file and serve briefs of evidence over several years should be taken as an indication of a lack of intention to bring the proceedings in a timely manner.

*Citation: case - Gwizo v Attorney-General [2022] NZHC 2727 (Gwizo)*

### [10]
Neither party has objected to the Tribunal determining this matter on the papers, accordingly the claim will be so determined.

## JURISDICTION TO STRIKE-OUT

### [11]
The Tribunal has a power to strike out proceedings pursuant to HRA, s 115A:

> **115A Tribunal may strike out, determine, or adjourn proceedings**
>
> (1) The Tribunal may strike out, in whole or in part, a proceeding if satisfied that it—
>
> (a) discloses no reasonable cause of action; or
>
> (b) is likely to cause prejudice or delay; or
>
> (c) is frivolous or vexatious; or
>
> (d) is otherwise an abuse of process.
>

*Citation: statute - HRA, s 115A*

### [12]
In this claim, s 115A(1)(d) is the relevant ground of potential strike-out.

*Citation: statute - s 115A(1)(d)*

### [13]
As noted by counsel for the Police, in Gwizo the High Court indicated at <sup>[47]</sup> that a decision to strike-out for an abuse of process involved a two-stage test: whether there was an abuse of process; and if so, should the discretion be exercised to strike-out the proceeding?

*Citation: case - Gwizo*

### [14]
It was also noted that s 115A is equivalent to the strike-out jurisdiction of the High Court under r 15.1 of the High Court Rules. The principles adopted by the High Court under r 15.1 may therefore inform the approach of the Tribunal to strike-out decisions, subject to any other relevant provisions of the HRA.

*Citation: statute - s 115A; Citation: regulation - r 15.1 of the High Court Rules; Citation: statute - HRA*

### [15]
There is a useful discussion of the High Court's jurisdiction to strike-out a proceeding under r 15.1 in Gwizo at <sup>[43]</sup> to <sup>[45]</sup>, which is also relevant to this case:

*Citation: regulation - r 15.1; Citation: case - Gwizo at [43] to [45]*

### [16]
Similarly, in Yarrow v Finnigan (2017) NZHC 1755 at <sup>[16]</sup>:

*Citation: case - Yarrow v Finnigan (2017) NZHC 1755 at [16]*

## ISSUES

### [17]
To determine whether the Tribunal should strike-out Mr Greer's claim, the Tribunal must consider the following two issues:

[17.1] Is Mr Greer's failure to progress this claim an abuse of process?

[17.2] If so, should the Tribunal exercise its discretion to strike-out the claim?

## IS MR GREER'S CLAIM AN ABUSE OF PROCESS?

### [18]
Mr Greer has been given multiple opportunities to file his evidence, in particular:

[18.1] By Minute dated 10 September 2020, Mr Greer was directed to file his evidence by 18 December 2020. Mr Greer did not file any evidence and did not contact the Tribunal to seek an extension or explain his failure to file evidence.

[18.2] By Minute dated 31 October 2022, the Tribunal noted Mr Greer's failure to progress his claim and directed Mr Greer to file his evidence by 2 December 2022. Mr Greer did not file his evidence and did not contact the Tribunal.

[18.3] Having noted the repeated failure by Mr Greer to file his evidence, Mr Greer was put on notice by Minute dated 5 December 2022 that the Tribunal was considering striking-out Mr Greer's claim. Both parties were provided with the opportunity to file submissions addressing this by 19 December 2022. Police responded with submissions, but Mr Greer did not respond at all.

### [19]
The Tribunal determines, after having regard to Mr Greer's repeated failure to file his evidence over the past two years, that this inaction must be regarded as deliberate. Mr Greer has had ample time to file his evidence and has been aware since the first teleconference in 2017 of the steps necessary to progress this claim.

### [20]
This inaction is a deliberate failure to engage with the Tribunal process and the long period of inactivity displayed by Mr Greer indicates no intention to bring these proceedings to a conclusion in a timely manner.

### [21]
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that Mr Greer's failure to progress his claim is an abuse of process.

## SHOULD THE TRIBUNAL EXERCISE ITS DISCRETION?

### [22]
Having found that Mr Greer's failure to progress his claim is an abuse of process, the Tribunal must now consider whether to exercise its discretion to strike-out Mr Greer's claim.

### [23]
Mr Greer has provided no submissions advocating for the Tribunal to not strike-out his claim, nor has he contacted the Tribunal at all for two years and the Tribunal has concluded his failure to progress the claim is an abuse of process.

### [24]
This Tribunal has previously noted the importance of the need for finality of proceedings for both the Tribunal and the parties (see Muir v Zhou (Strike-Out) <sup>[2022]</sup> NZHRRT 49 at <sup>[26]</sup>). In Gwizo the High Court also noted that it is relevant to consider the effect of a plaintiff's non-compliance on the Tribunal, given the limited resources of the Tribunal.

*Citation: case - Muir v Zhou (Strike-Out) [2022] NZHRRT 49 at [26]; Citation: case - Gwizo*

### [25]
If this claim was to remain before the Tribunal, the Tribunal would be required to follow up with Mr Greer periodically to remind him to file evidence, this takes the Tribunal's limited resources away from progressing and determining other claims. It also leaves the defendant and any witnesses in this matter in an uncertain position waiting for evidence to be filed to respond to. While the Tribunal accepts that the jurisdiction to strike-out should not be used lightly, over the past two years, Mr Greer has taken no steps to progress the claim.

### [26]
For these reasons it is appropriate that the Tribunal exercise its discretion under s115A(1)(d) to strike-out Mr Greer's claim.

*Citation: statute - s115A(1)(d)*

## ORDER

### [27]
Mr Greer's claim against the Commissioner of Police is struck-out in its entirety.

---

**Ms SJ Eyre**  
Chairperson

**Dr SJ Hickey MNZM**  
Member

**Ms L Ashworth**  
Member

---

## Footnotes

[^1]: [This decision is to be cited as Greer v Police (Strike-Out Application) [2022] NZHRRT 51]

